# Emergency Vehicle Classification - Can Emergency Vehicles Be Accurately Classified Using Image Learning?
#### By Vishal Kamalakrishnan
#### A Case Study For DS 4002 Spr 2025

Emergency vehicles such as ambulances, fire trucks, and police cars require swift movement through traffic to respond to critical situations. However, increasing traffic congestion often prevents these vehicles from reaching their destinations in time, potentially putting lives at risk [^fn1]. This case study seeks to accurately classify emergency from non-emergency vehicles utilizing ResNet [^fn2] and the insights from this research could be integrated into intelligent transportation systems.

## Repository Structure
```
.
├── README.md                # Project overview and instructions along with results at the bottom 
├── LICENSE.md               # License information (MIT)
├── Materials/SCRIPTS/
│   ├── 1-data_description.ipynb         # Visualizing data images
│   ├── 2-eda.ipynb                      # Preliminary data discovery and exploration
│   ├── 3-resnet_model.ipynb             # Detailed model code and analysis
├── Materials/DATA/
│   └── data.zip             # Zip file containing images and test/train csv files
├── Materials/OUTPUT/        # Plots generated by SCRIPTS
├── Materials/Articles/      # Helpful resources for addition context and model design
│   └── The-Vital-Role-Of-Emergency-Vehicles-In-Public-Safety.pdf
│   └── Vehicle-Classification-Using-ResNet.pdf
```

### Additional Documents

The hook (`HOOK.pdf`) provides an overview of the case study, background information, and the motivation behind the case study. The rubric (`CS3-Rubric.pdf`) outlines the formatting, submission requirements, and final deliverables for this assignment. Both documents should be referenced throughout the completion of the case study to help achieve success.

### Data

This dataset was obtained from the Analytics Vidhya JantaHack Computer Vision Hackathon, which originally served as a competition for creating the best model to classifiy emergency vehicles[^fn3]. It includes images of emergency vehicles as well as a training and a test dataset. An account is required to sign up for the Hackathon and collect the data - for the purpose of this case study the data has been provided and labeled in the `Materials/DATA` folder. 

## Software / Platform

We are using Jupter Notebooks for this program that run on Python 3 (prefferably 3.10+). Our code can be run on **Google Colab** by importing our notebooks. The following files require access to a GPU (or else will be very slow):

1. 1-data_description.ipynb
2. 2-eda.iynb

For this file, a **Windows** or **Linux** environment is needed with `pytorch` ..., packages and access to a Nvidia GPU and respective drivers. Additonal packages will be included in the files themselves as a runtime dependency. These files can alternatively be run on **Google Colab** or **Rivanna**. 

All additional files will need a Python environment with the packages `pandas`, `numpy`, `matplotlib`, `tensorflow`, `PIL`, and with support for `Jupyter Notebooks` and can be run on **Windows**, **Linux**, or **Mac**

1. 1-data_description.ipynb
2. 3-resnet_model.ipynb

## Steps To Reproduce

To reproduce the results of the project first clone the repository the following command in your terminal 
```
git clone https://github.com/TheV123/DS-4002-CS
```

You can run the individual files locally (provided you follow the specifications listed in - [Software / Platform](##Software%20/%20Platform)) or can run them in **Rivanna** or **Google Colab**. The image data is provided as a `.zip` file and will have to be unzipped in order to be processed by the notebooks. This can be done using a file archiver such as `7zip` or `winrar`. In **Rivanna** or any other Linux environment, these commands can be run to unzip the file:

```
sudo apt-get install unzip

unzip data.zip
```

The scripts can be run in the order shown by their filenames. Prior to the scripts being run the data must be unzipped(as shown above).

1. 1-data_description.ipynb
2. 2-eda.iynb
3. 3-resnet_model.ipynb

`1-data_description.ipynb` allows the user to visualize the test and train image data. `2-eda.ipynb` creates exploratory plots of the data. `3-resnet_model.ipynb` runs the resnet model code on the data.

### References

[^fn1]: C. Fernandes, "Emergency vs Non-Emergency Vehicle Classification," Analytics Vidhya, Jun. 29, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/emergency-vs-non-emergency-vehicle-classification-cc5907977fe5
[^fn2]: "ResNet Model Documentation," Hugging Face. Available: https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/model_doc/resnet
[^fn3]: Analytics Vidhya, "JanataHack: Computer Vision Hackathon," Analytics Vidhya, [Online]. Available: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/datahack/contest/janatahack-computer-vision-hackathon/#ProblemStatement. [Accessed: 07-Apr-2025].